# Components

## Accordion

An accordion is a UI/UX component used to organize and display content in a
space-efficient, collapsible format. It consists of vertically stacked sections,
each with a clickable header that expands or collapses its associated content.
This design helps reduce visual clutter, allowing users to focus on one section
at a time while keeping other content hidden until needed. Commonly used in
FAQs, filters, or mobile menus, accordions enhance usability by streamlining
content access and improving navigation on both desktop and mobile interfaces.

## Alert

TODO

## action-link

TODO NHS England

## Avatar circle

An avatar circle is a UI/UX component that displays a user’s profile image or
initials within a circular frame, commonly used to represent a user identity in
apps, websites, and social platforms. This visual element provides a quick,
recognizable way for users to identify themselves or others, often appearing in
headers, comments, chat interfaces, and account menus. The circular shape is
aesthetically pleasing and universally recognized as a placeholder for personal
identity, contributing to a more humanized and personalized user experience.
When no image is available, initials or default icons are often shown inside the
circle.

## Back link

A back link in UI/UX is a navigational component that allows users to return
to a previous page or step within an app or website, often represented as a
left-pointing arrow accompanied by text like “Back” or the name of the previous
page. It enhances usability by providing a clear, intuitive way to reverse
navigation without relying solely on the browser’s back button. Back links are
especially important in mobile and multi-step interfaces, helping users maintain
their sense of orientation and reducing frustration by making navigation feel
more seamless and controlled.

## Badge

TODO

## Banner

TODO

## Beach ball

The beach ball in UI/UX typically refers to a loading indicator or waiting
indicator, most famously seen as the colorful spinning cursor on macOS when the
system is busy or unresponsive. While not always a formal “component” in design
systems, it represents a visual cue that a process is in progress and the user
must wait. In broader UI/UX contexts, similar spinning indicators or animations
(often circular) serve the same purpose—communicating that the system is working
on a task. While helpful for setting expectations, overuse or long durations of
beach ball indicators can lead to user frustration, so they should be paired with
good performance practices or more informative feedback when possible.

## Breadcrumbs

Breadcrumbs are a UI/UX navigation component that displays a trail of links
showing the user's current location within a website or app's hierarchy,
typically appearing near the top of a page. Each link represents a parent page,
allowing users to easily backtrack or understand the structure of the site.
Breadcrumbs enhance usability by improving orientation, reducing the number of
actions needed to navigate, and helping users avoid getting lost—especially in
websites with deep or complex navigation paths, like e-commerce or content-heavy
platforms.

## Button

A button is a fundamental UI/UX component that allows users to trigger an action
or event within an interface, such as submitting a form, navigating to another
page, or opening a menu. Typically, buttons are rectangular or rounded with text
or icons that describe their function (e.g., "Submit," "Cancel," or "Next").
They are often styled to be visually distinct, using colors, shadows, and hover
effects to signal interactivity. Buttons play a crucial role in user navigation
and interaction, making them essential for guiding users through tasks,
providing clear feedback on actions, and enhancing the overall user experience
by offering intuitive, actionable controls.

## Calendar

A calendar is a UI/UX component that displays dates in a structured, visual
format—typically as a monthly grid—and allows users to view, select, or interact
with specific dates. It's commonly used for scheduling, booking, event planning,
or setting deadlines in applications like calendars, to-do lists, or reservation
systems. A well-designed calendar component enhances usability by making date
selection intuitive and efficient, often including features like date pickers,
highlighted current dates, and navigational arrows for switching between months
or years. It helps users manage time-based tasks with clarity and ease,
contributing to a more organized and user-friendly experience.

## Call to action (CTA)

TODO

## Caption

TODO

## Card

A card is a UI/UX component that presents content and actions related to a
single subject in a visually distinct, contained layout—often resembling a
physical card. It typically includes elements like images, titles, text,
buttons, or icons, and is used to group information in a clean, digestible
format. Cards are commonly seen in dashboards, product listings, news feeds, and
profile summaries, providing a modular and responsive way to organize and
display content. Their flexible design enhances visual hierarchy and
scannability, making it easier for users to browse, interact with, and
understand information at a glance.

## Character counter

TODO

## Checkbox

A checkbox is a UI/UX component that allows users to select one or more options
from a list by toggling individual boxes on or off. Represented as small square
boxes that display a checkmark when selected, checkboxes are commonly used in
forms, settings, filters, and preference menus where multiple selections are
allowed. They offer a simple and intuitive way for users to make binary choices
(checked or unchecked), and are often accompanied by labels to clearly describe
the option. Checkboxes enhance usability by supporting flexibility in user input
and ensuring that selections are easy to understand, modify, and submit.

## Checklist

TODO

## Date picker

A date picker is a UI/UX component that allows users to easily select a specific
date (and sometimes time) from a visual calendar interface, rather than typing
it manually. Often used in forms, booking systems, and scheduling tools, it
typically appears as a pop-up calendar when a user clicks on a date input field.
Date pickers enhance usability by minimizing input errors, speeding up data
entry, and providing a clear, intuitive way to navigate through days, months,
and years. A well-designed date picker improves user efficiency and accuracy,
especially when dealing with date-sensitive tasks like reservations, deadlines,
or event planning.

## Details

TODO

## Dial

TODO

## Dialog box

TODO

## Do/don't list

TODO NHS English

## Donut chart

## Dropdown menu

TODO

## Emoji

TODO

## Error message

An error message is a UI/UX component that informs users when something has gone
wrong, such as incorrect input, failed actions, or system issues. It plays a
critical role in guiding users by clearly communicating what went wrong, why it
happened, and how to fix it—ideally using plain, friendly language and visual
cues like color (often red) or icons. Effective error messages reduce user
frustration, support task completion, and enhance overall trust in the
interface. Whether shown inline, as pop-ups, or banners, well-designed error
messages contribute to a smoother, more supportive user experience.

## Error summary

TODO NHS England

## Fieldset

A fieldset is a UI/UX component used to group related form elements together,
often visually enclosed with a border, to indicate they belong to the same
category or set of information. Typically used in forms, fieldsets help organize
input fields logically, making the form more structured and easier to
understand. A legend element can be included within the fieldset to provide a
title or description for the group, further enhancing clarity. By visually
grouping related inputs, fieldsets improve form usability, guiding users through
complex forms and improving accessibility for screen readers.

## File dialog

A file dialog is a UI/UX component that allows users to browse, select, and
upload files from their device to a website or application. Typically activated
by a button labeled “Choose File” or “Upload,” it opens a system dialog where
users can navigate folders and select one or more files. This component is
essential in forms, messaging apps, and content management systems where
user-generated content or document submission is required. A well-designed file
dialog enhances usability by clearly indicating accepted file types, providing
feedback after selection (like showing the file name), and ensuring
accessibility across devices and platforms.

## Flair

TODO

## Footer

A footer is a UI/UX component located at the bottom of a web page or app screen,
typically used to provide secondary navigation, legal information, contact
details, and links to important but less prominent content like privacy
policies, terms of service, or social media profiles. It serves as a closing
section that helps users find additional resources or revisit key areas without
scrolling back to the top. A well-structured footer improves site usability,
reinforces trust, and ensures accessibility to critical information, especially
on long or content-rich pages.

## Footnote

TODO

# Gauge

TODO

## Hamburger menu

A hamburger menu is a UI/UX component represented by a small icon with three
horizontal lines, resembling a hamburger, typically located in the top corner of
a user interface. When clicked or tapped, it reveals a hidden navigation menu or
list of options, helping to keep the main interface clean and
uncluttered—especially on mobile devices or smaller screens. While it saves
space and simplifies the layout, its discoverability and usability have been
debated, as some users may not immediately recognize its function without prior
experience.

## Header

A header is a fundamental UI/UX component typically positioned at the top of a
web page or app screen, serving as a consistent area for branding, navigation,
and key actions. It often contains elements like a logo, navigation links,
search bars, user profiles, or call-to-action buttons. The header plays a
crucial role in guiding users, providing context, and enabling quick access to
essential features across the site or application. A well-designed header
enhances usability, reinforces brand identity, and supports intuitive navigation
throughout the user experience.

## Hint

TODO NHS England

## Holy Grail layout

The Holy Grail layout is a classic and widely used web design pattern that
features a three-column structure with a fixed header at the top and a footer at
the bottom. The layout includes a main content area in the center, flanked by a
left sidebar (often for navigation) and a right sidebar (commonly used for
related content or ads). Its name reflects its long-standing value and
flexibility in UI/UX design, offering a balanced way to organize content for
readability and functionality. The Holy Grail layout is particularly effective
for desktop interfaces, providing clear structure and easy access to key
elements while maintaining a cohesive, user-friendly experience.

## Image

TODO

## Input

TOOD

## Inset text

TODO NHS England

## Knob

TODO

## Label

A label is a UI/UX component that provides a descriptive name or instruction for
an associated form element, such as an input field, checkbox, or radio button.
It enhances accessibility and usability by clearly indicating the purpose of the
form element, making it easier for users to understand what information is being
requested. Labels are typically placed next to or above the corresponding form
controls, and when correctly linked with the form element (using the `for`
attribute in HTML), they improve interaction, especially for screen reader
users. Well-designed labels contribute to a more intuitive and inclusive user
experience, ensuring that users can navigate and fill out forms with ease.

## Line chart

TODO

## Notification

TODO

## Pagination

Pagination is a UI/UX component that divides content into separate pages,
allowing users to navigate through large sets of data or information one section
at a time. Commonly used in search results, product listings, and long article
feeds, pagination improves performance and readability by loading only a portion
of the content at once. It typically appears as a series of numbered links,
along with “Previous” and “Next” buttons, enabling users to easily move forward
or backward through content. This component helps manage content overload,
enhances navigation, and gives users a clear sense of progress and location
within a dataset or multi-page layout.

## Panel

A panel is a UI/UX component that serves as a container for grouping related
content, controls, or settings within an interface. Panels are commonly used in
dashboards, sidebars, modals, or collapsible sections to organize information in
a structured and accessible way. They help break down complex interfaces into
manageable sections, improving clarity and user focus. Panels often include
headers, content areas, and optional actions like buttons or icons, and can be
static or interactive—such as draggable or expandable. By compartmentalizing
content, panels enhance usability and allow users to navigate and interact with
information more efficiently.

## Pie chart

TODO

## Popover

TODO

## Popup

TODO

## Radio button

A radio button is a UI/UX component that allows users to select one option from
a predefined set of mutually exclusive choices. Typically represented as small
circular buttons, radio buttons are used in forms or surveys where only one
option is allowed to be selected at a time. When a user clicks on a radio
button, it becomes filled or checked, while other buttons in the same group are
automatically deselected. This behavior visually indicates the user's choice,
making it clear that only one selection is possible. Radio buttons enhance
usability by providing a simple, intuitive way to make single-choice selections
within a group of options.

## Red-Amber-Green (RAG)

The Red-Amber-Green (RAG) UI/UX component is a visual status indicator that uses
the traffic light color scheme—red, amber (yellow), and green—to represent
different levels of status, performance, or urgency. Commonly used in
dashboards, reports, and project tracking tools, it provides an at-a-glance
understanding of how something is performing: green typically means everything
is on track, amber signals caution or minor issues, and red indicates a critical
problem that needs immediate attention. RAG indicators enhance usability by
delivering quick, intuitive feedback through universally understood colors,
enabling users to assess situations rapidly and prioritize actions effectively.

## Scrollbar

TODO

## Select

A select is a UI/UX component that provides a dropdown menu, allowing users to
choose one or more options from a list. Typically displayed as a button or input
field that expands when clicked, a select component helps condense a long list
of options into a compact, space-efficient format. It is commonly used in forms,
filters, or settings to offer a wide range of choices, such as selecting a
country, date, or category. The select component enhances usability by keeping
the interface clean and organized, enabling users to quickly navigate through a
set of options and make their selection with ease.

## Skip-link

TODO NHS England

## Slide-out drawer

A slide-out drawer is a UI/UX component that slides in from the side of the
screen—usually from the left or right—to reveal additional content or navigation
options without leaving the current page. Often triggered by a button or swipe
gesture, it’s commonly used for menus, filters, settings, or secondary content
in mobile and web applications. This component allows for efficient use of
screen space by keeping less frequently used options hidden until needed,
enhancing focus and minimizing clutter in the main interface while maintaining
easy access to extended functionality.

## Slider

TODO

## Sparklines

TODO

## Spinner

TODO

## Summary-list

TODO NHS England

## Tab

A tab is a UI/UX component that allows users to navigate between different
sections of content within a single interface by clicking or tapping on labeled
tabs, typically displayed horizontally at the top of a content area. Each tab
represents a distinct section, and only the content related to the active tab is
displayed at a time, keeping the interface clean and organized. Tabs help group
similar information in a compact and accessible way, allowing users to switch
between views without reloading or navigating away from the page. They enhance
usability by providing an intuitive, quick way to explore different content or
options within the same context.

## Table

A table is a UI/UX component used to display structured data in rows and
columns, making it easy to compare and analyze information at a glance. Commonly
used for things like reports, schedules, product lists, or dashboards, tables
organize content into headers and cells, often with features like sorting,
filtering, pagination, and inline editing to enhance usability. A well-designed
table improves data readability, supports efficient decision-making, and allows
users to quickly find patterns or specific details. Tables are essential in
data-heavy interfaces, offering both clarity and functionality in a compact
format.

## Table of contents

A table of contents (TOC) is a UI/UX component that provides a structured,
hierarchical overview of the content on a page or within a document, typically
listing section headings as clickable links. It helps users quickly navigate to
specific parts of the content without scrolling, improving accessibility and
ease of use—especially in long-form pages like articles, documentation, or
reports. A well-designed TOC enhances the user experience by offering clear
orientation, reducing cognitive load, and enabling faster information retrieval.
It’s often presented as a sidebar, dropdown, or sticky element that stays
visible as users scroll through the content.

## Task-list

TODO NHS England

## Textarea

A textarea is a UI/UX component that allows users to input and edit multiple
lines of text, commonly used in forms for comments, messages, descriptions, or
feedback. Unlike a standard input field that accepts a single line, a textarea
provides a larger, scrollable text box that supports extended content. It can be
resized by users (depending on the design) and may include placeholder text,
character counters, or validation feedback to guide input. A textarea enhances
user interaction by offering a flexible and comfortable space for expressing
more detailed thoughts or information within a clean and accessible interface.

## Theme chooser

A theme chooser is a UI/UX component that allows users to switch between
different visual styles or color schemes of an interface, most commonly between
light and dark themes. This component enhances personalization and accessibility
by letting users select a theme that suits their preferences, environment, or
visual comfort—such as using dark mode in low-light settings to reduce eye
strain. Typically found in settings menus or as a toggle icon (like a sun/moon),
the theme chooser contributes to a more user-centric experience by adapting the
interface to different contexts while maintaining consistent functionality.

## Time picker

A time picker is a UI/UX component that allows users to select a specific time
of day, often used alongside a date picker in forms, scheduling tools, or
booking systems. It typically presents a dropdown or interactive interface with
options for hours, minutes, and sometimes AM/PM or seconds, enabling precise and
error-free time input without manual typing. Time pickers enhance usability by
offering a clear and structured way to enter time values, reducing input
mistakes and improving the overall user experience. A well-designed time picker
is intuitive, accessible, and adaptable to various formats (12-hour or 24-hour),
making it easy for users to set appointments, reminders, or deadlines.

## Timeline

TODO

## Tree menu

A tree menu is a UI/UX component that displays hierarchical or nested navigation
options, often represented with expandable and collapsible nodes, resembling the
structure of a tree. Each node in the tree menu can contain sub-options or
categories, allowing users to drill down into deeper levels of content or
functionality. This type of menu is particularly useful for organizing complex
or large datasets, file directories, or multi-level categories, as it visually
reflects relationships between different elements. Tree menus enhance usability
by providing an intuitive, organized way to navigate through structured data
while maintaining a compact layout.

## Tooltip

A tooltip is a UI/UX component that provides brief, contextual information when
a user hovers over, focuses on, or taps an element—typically icons, buttons, or
form fields. Tooltips are used to clarify the function or meaning of an element
without cluttering the interface, offering helpful hints, labels, or
explanations on demand. They usually appear as small floating boxes near the
target element and disappear when the interaction ends. Tooltips enhance
usability by guiding users subtly and efficiently, especially in interfaces
where space is limited or where actions may not be immediately self-explanatory.

## Wall

TODO

## Warning-callout

TODO NHS England
